Here are the viva questions and answers (in English) based on your practical list:

✅ Practical 1: Installation – NS3, NetAnim, Wireshark, PyViz, tcpdump
1. What is NS3 and what are its applications?
Answer: NS3 (Network Simulator 3) is a discrete-event network simulator used for research and education. It allows simulation of wired and wireless networks and is widely used to test network protocols, topologies, and performance.

2. How do you install NS3 on a Linux machine?
Answer:

sudo apt update  
sudo apt install git cmake g++ python3  
git clone https://gitlab.com/nsnam/ns-3-dev.git  
cd ns-3-dev  
./ns3 configure  
./ns3 build
3. What is the role of NetAnim in NS3 simulations?
Answer: NetAnim is a visualization tool used with NS3 to animate and visualize network simulations. It shows node movement, packet flow, and connection status.

4. How does Wireshark help in network analysis?
Answer: Wireshark is a packet analyzer that captures and displays the data traveling over a network. It helps analyze protocol headers, troubleshoot network issues, and understand traffic patterns.

5. What is PyViz? How is it different from NetAnim?
Answer: PyViz is a real-time network visualization tool integrated with NS3 using Python bindings. Unlike NetAnim, it provides live simulation visualization during runtime.

6. What is tcpdump?
Answer: tcpdump is a command-line packet analyzer that captures packets on a network interface. It's lightweight and useful for debugging network problems.

✅ Practical 2: Linux Network Commands
7. What is the difference between ifconfig and ip?
Answer: ifconfig is older and used to configure network interfaces, while ip is newer and more powerful, used for IP address, route, and link configuration.

8. What is the purpose of the ping command?
Answer: It checks connectivity between two network devices by sending ICMP Echo Requests and measuring the response time.

9. What does netstat show?
Answer: It displays active network connections, routing tables, interface statistics, etc.

10. What is traceroute used for?
Answer: It traces the path packets take from the source to the destination, helping to identify network bottlenecks.

11. What is the function of nslookup?
Answer: It queries DNS servers to get domain name or IP address mappings.

12. What does the route command do?
Answer: It displays or modifies the IP routing table.

13. What is the hostname command used for?
Answer: It shows or sets the name of the system on the network.

Would you like me to continue with the viva questions and answers for the remaining practicals (3 to 13)?

Great! Here's the continuation of viva questions and answers (in English) for Practicals 3 to 13 based on your network simulation syllabus:

✅ Practical 3: Simulate Point-to-Point Topology
1. What is a point-to-point topology?
Answer: A point-to-point topology connects exactly two nodes directly with each other through a single link.

2. What are the advantages of point-to-point connections?
Answer: High speed, dedicated bandwidth, and simplicity.

3. How is point-to-point simulated in NS3?
Answer: Using PointToPointHelper, two nodes are created, linked, and applications like OnOffApplication or UdpEchoServer are installed.

✅ Practical 4: Simulate Bus Topology
1. What is bus topology?
Answer: A topology where all nodes are connected to a single communication line (bus) and share the same channel.

2. What are the drawbacks of bus topology?
Answer: Collisions, limited scalability, and difficult fault isolation.

3. How is a bus topology created in NS3?
Answer: By connecting multiple nodes using a shared channel, often using CsmaHelper.

✅ Practical 5: Simulate Star Topology
1. What is star topology?
Answer: A topology where all nodes are connected to a central hub or switch.

2. What are the benefits of star topology?
Answer: Easy to manage, scalable, and one node failure doesn't affect others.

3. How do we simulate it in NS3?
Answer: Create a central node and connect other nodes to it using PointToPoint or Csma.

✅ Practical 6: Simulate Mesh Topology
1. What is mesh topology?
Answer: A topology where every node is connected to every other node directly or via multiple paths.

2. Why is mesh topology reliable?
Answer: Redundant paths provide fault tolerance and high reliability.

3. How is it simulated in NS3?
Answer: Manually create nodes and links between all pairs using PointToPointHelper.

✅ Practical 7: Simulate Hybrid Topology
1. What is a hybrid topology?
Answer: A combination of two or more basic topologies like star, bus, and ring.

2. Why use hybrid topology?
Answer: It provides flexibility, scalability, and robustness.

3. How to simulate hybrid topology in NS3?
Answer: By combining different helper classes (PointToPointHelper, CsmaHelper) to simulate varied connections.

✅ Practical 8: Simulate UDP Client-Server
1. What is UDP?
Answer: UDP (User Datagram Protocol) is a connectionless, fast, but unreliable protocol.

2. How is UDP used in client-server communication?
Answer: The client sends messages to the server without establishing a connection.

3. How to simulate this in NS3?
Answer: Use UdpEchoServerHelper and UdpEchoClientHelper.

✅ Practical 9: Simulate DHCP Server and Clients
1. What is DHCP?
Answer: Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol assigns IP addresses to clients automatically.

2. What are the advantages of DHCP?
Answer: Reduces manual configuration, prevents IP conflicts.

3. How to simulate DHCP in NS3?
Answer: NS3 does not directly support DHCP simulation. Custom scripts or extensions are used for behavior approximation.

✅ Practical 10: Simulate FTP using TCP
1. What is FTP?
Answer: File Transfer Protocol is used to transfer files over TCP.

2. Why is TCP preferred for FTP?
Answer: TCP provides reliability, error checking, and ordered delivery.

3. How to simulate FTP in NS3?
Answer: Use BulkSendApplication to mimic file transfer over TCP.

✅ Practical 11: Protocol Analysis using Wireshark
1. What is packet capturing?
Answer: It's the process of intercepting data packets traveling across a network.

2. How do you analyze packets in Wireshark?
Answer: By examining layers (Ethernet, IP, TCP/UDP, HTTP, etc.) and header fields.

3. Name common protocols you observe while browsing.
Answer: DNS, TCP, UDP, HTTP, HTTPS, ARP, ICMP.

✅ Practical 12: Evaluate Network Performance
1. What is throughput?
Answer: The rate at which data is successfully transmitted over the network.

2. Define latency (delay).
Answer: The time taken by a packet to travel from source to destination.

3. What is packet loss?
Answer: The number of packets that do not reach the destination.

4. What are dropped packets?
Answer: Packets intentionally discarded due to congestion, errors, or routing issues.

5. How can you measure these in NS3?
Answer: Using FlowMonitor and trace files.

✅ Practical 13: Project Work – Complex Networks, Congestion Control, MAC Protocols
1. What is congestion control?
Answer: Techniques to avoid excessive traffic that can degrade network performance.

2. Name some congestion control algorithms.
Answer: TCP Tahoe, TCP Reno, TCP Cubic, BBR.

3. What are MAC protocols?
Answer: Medium Access Control protocols define rules for nodes to access shared media.

4. Examples of MAC protocols?
Answer: CSMA/CD (Ethernet), CSMA/CA (Wi-Fi), TDMA.

5. What is a complex network?
Answer: A network with non-trivial topological features such as scale-free or small-world properties.